If you have really really high
ambitions, you achieve great things even
if you fail. If you have low ambitions,
you achieve nothing even if you succeed.
>> Where do you think the tech sector
evolves from here?
>> Well, that's the trillion dollar
question, right?
>> Luckily, you manage what, two trillion.
So,
>> when I give presentations at
universities, I I ask people, hey,
anybody here who thinks differently from
other people who kind of think that they
are weird, hands up. So, typically less
than 10%. I said, you guys, you're
great. We'd love to hire you. And then
the other 90% is like, you know, sorry
guys, you're just like everybody else.
You're never going to make much money.
Okay, so I never do politics because my
job is not is totally not political. But
if I were like uh prime minister for a
day, I would inject AI everywhere. If
you look at the golden ages we've had
and you look at, you know, the real
powers we've had during the years, you
know, Rome, Venice, they were open
economies, free trade, um, free movement
of, uh, labor, thought, and so on. What
they all have in common in terms of the
end of the golden ages is
what are you leaning against right now?
Well, I think uh the stuff to lean
against if you really want to do the
opposite of everybody else would be to,
you know, do less AI related investments
and more real estate investments.
>> How do you see real estate playing out?
>> Well, that's a very tough one, right?
But it's not very popular and I see that
uh a lot of big investors are uh
reducing their exposures to to real
estate. So, that's probably a good sign,
right, that there are better times
ahead.
>> What do you think of office? I I guess
that's the worst real estate classroom.
>> It's very bad. It's very bad.
>> So, you have to think uh in a way you've
had a bit of a perfect crisis there now
in that uh COVID meant that more people
were working from home. You had uh some
trouble with uh you know part of the
banking system. You had rates uh you
know being relatively high and so you
had a few factors there uh impacting it
negatively.
>> How do you think about rates? I mean
historically there's been a I think the
average is 6% or something somewhere
thereabouts and we've been lower than
that for almost 20 years now.
>> Yeah. We have been very low and for a
very long period of time. I think there
are some structural issues which mean
that they probably will be
a bit higher than they have been and I
think one one um factor here which uh
you know people don't talk so much about
just now is is the impact on climate you
know so climate is impacting harvest is
impacting prices for a lot of you know
raw material and uh and impact factors
in particular to the food side so be it
uh you know chocolate coffee and so on
then you got various fires uh you just
you just get a lot of kind of impacts
from climate on pricing structures
um you know it also hits kind of
insurance rates free insurance rates um
and so on so that's on the one hand now
the thing which is pulling in the other
direction is of course efficiency gains
through AI and uh you'll have uh you
know just much more intelligence
uh at cheaper levels right
>> where do you think the tech sector
evolves from here.
>> Well, that's the trillion dollar
question, right?
>> Luckily, you manage what, two trillion.
So, [laughter]
>> um, it's pretty pretty hot, right? That
I think we can agree on that. And I
think it's quite interesting. So, you
have Yansen Huang, the CEO of N Media,
who goes to Korea, right? He hangs out
with the guys at Samsung. they go and
have uh you know some uh deep fried
chicken and so when they are
photographed in this uh chicken uh
restaurant the share price of uh of that
chicken chain is going up like 20% right
and the company that actually breeds
chicken in Korea is going up a lot and
the company that does the robotic arms
to actually deep fry the chicken is also
going up a lot so it's uh just indicates
to me that this is now a very very hot
sector when things like that
What would be your argument for the fact
that we're in an AI bubble and then
against the fact that we're in
>> well I think um okay AI bubble you would
look at things like valuations you'd
look at circularity in terms of
ownership and and uh you know vendor
financing uh these type of things. um
you'd look at uh news coverage uh you
look at things like what happens when
they eat you know chicken at a
restaurant. So you just kind of just
look at how frothy a sector is. On the
other side it has huge um ramifications
for how we live our lives and we see in
our firm we are increasing productivity
probably by 20% just by utilizing it
more and we're just stuffing it in
wherever we can and it's making a huge
impact. How does that show up the
increase in productivity?
>> Well, we it shows up um in that we do
more with the same amount of people. You
know, we have we are keeping headcount
now flat and we are just producing more
and producing better quality.
>> What do you think would cause inflation
to come back? [snorts]
>> Um
slower world economy, you know, AI
leading to more productivity gains. uh
humanoids so increased use of robotics
which is just a cheaper labor supply.
>> Is AI making decisions now at the firm
or is it
>> No, we are there is always a human in
the loop but it's helping us. It's
supporting our decision- making.
>> Do you think it'll ever replace humans
in investing?
>> I uh not in our place. Um but clearly in
some places right you have uh fully
automated uh uh you know investment
models in a lot of places.
>> What skills do you think will matter
more in an AI world?
>> Interpersonal skills uh you know the
ability to talk to people, the ability
to listen and uh you know empathy. I
mean these these things have always been
important but they are just even more
important you know and I'm just I'm just
seeing it. so many places. It's really
really interesting.
>> You talked about uh the ability to
listen, I think, in your uh Wharton
commencement speech.
>> Yep.
>> Um how would you teach somebody to do
that?
>> Well, that's a tough one. Um
I mean, it can be taught in that you can
point it out to people that they talk
all the time and they don't listen,
right? So, you can say that, but I think
we we would fall back to how we are
generally. Um, and I think it needs to
come with some curiosity because if
you're not curious, you're not going to
listen. So, I think it goes it goes hand
inhand with that. I mean, generally you
should listen twice as much as you
speak, right? That's why you got two
ears and um but um
it's super important.
>> A lot of people think they're listening,
but they're not actually listening.
>> Yeah. They're just processing stuff and
can't wait to get to the next questions
themselves, you know? So there is there
is little listening.
Um I um I spoke to this guy called Saul
Pearlmutter. He is a scientist. He got
the Nobel Prize in physics.
And uh he said uh Nikolai we are now at
the stage in the world where we for the
first time can solve all the problems.
We can solve all the problems. We we
know how to solve the climate problem.
We know how to feed everybody in the
world. We have the technology. we have
the science. It's just that we don't
talk to each other. We don't listen. We
don't work together properly. So that's
why we need to zoom in. I think
>> would you say that's the biggest problem
in society? I think one of the biggest
problem now is um is the fact that we we
close up you know we um if you look at
the golden if you look at the golden
ages we've had and you look at you know
the real powers we've had during the
years you know Rome Venice
uh you know the Song Dynasty the
Netherlands you know these these places
which did really really well they were
open economies free trade um free
movement of uh labor thought and so on.
And what has what they all have in
common in terms of the end of the golden
ages is
uh close of free trades, tariffs,
um end of immigration, end of free
thought, the rise of the strong man, uh
attack on you know freedoms of all types
of you know sorts. And we are seeing
that in many places of the world. And uh
and that's a native.
>> Which one of those concerns you the
most?
>> All the above. For me, it's free speech.
It's like that seems to be the big
limiter.
>> Yeah. But you need you need new ideas,
you know, you need to rejuvenate
countries and societies. But clearly
free speech is important. How do you see
the difference between American and
European mindsets?
>> So, this is super interesting, right?
Um,
uh, and now I'm in New York for a month
and, you know, wow, the energy here, uh,
the entrepreneurship, the drive, you
know, I just get so much energy just
living here. Uh, level of ambitions
super high.
uh versus Europe where there is I mean
Europe is a fantastic place too right
but for different reasons um you know
culturally uh incredible uh you know
food pretty good in many places but less
ambitions you know the thing with
ambitions I think it's so interesting if
you have really really high ambitions
you achieve great things even if you
fail if you have low ambitions you
achieve nothing even if you succeed and
so having great ambitions is just
fantastic
And you know in in America five I mean
do you think five is a high number or a
low number
>> for what?
>> Well just generally number is number
five high
>> low.
>> Well there you go. You think you think
five is low? Okay. You asking you know a
European is five high or low? They would
say it's pretty high. So it's just like
and so the whole concept of you know
growth rates ambitions and so on is
different. And then of course you work
much harder in America. I mean that's
just not something I think. It's just
like the facts. you got less holiday
uh and so on.
>> Do you think that it's good or bad?
>> I think it's both. I think it's good for
um some things in society and I think
it's not so good for the people
involved.
>> It's so interesting because if you think
of it from an evolutionary point of
view, I mean, evolution doesn't care
about you. It cares about the species.
>> And so it would sacrifice you and make
you work harder for the good of the the
whole unit and the survival of the unit.
Was it a culture shock when you came to
Wharton?
>> To Wharton?
>> Yeah.
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. Well, you
[clears throat] see the um in a way in
Norway is the opposite of Wharton.
Um because in Norway everybody's
supposed to be the same. You have this
thing called Yantelovven. It's just like
don't don't think you are fantastic in
any way, shape or form. Uh so you come
to I sit there in a class and it's just
like hey what do you guys want to
achieve in life? And one one of the my
fellow students just hands up what do
you want to do? I just want to conquer
the world. And that's kind of a
statement which is totally normal,
>> you know, at Wharton, but it's not
particularly normal in where I'm from.
>> How would you change that to add more
ambition?
>> I don't think you can change it. You
can't you can't change a you can't
change a nation, but you can change it
in your own company, and you can work on
the corporate culture, in the firm you
work, and you can change it with
yourself and your family and your
friends. But to change the ambition
level of a whole country, I don't think
you can do that. It's tough.
>> How would you go about it if you had to
if that was your task?
>> Okay. So, I never do politics because my
job is is totally not political.
>> But if I were like uh prime minister for
a day [laughter]
>> and your only job just ambition, nothing
sort of like
>> I would I would inject AI everywhere. Um
I would
I would just go all in.
I would do what they did you know in
Sweden in the 80s they had something
called home PC so they bought 800,000
PCs in a country of I don't know at that
stage let's say it was 67 million or
something eight um put them in people's
homes and it just increased the
digitalization of the country so now you
have you know Spotify cla all these
things so is it directly linked no
probably not but you know they they
increase the digitization now they're
doing the same thing with AI now they're
doing the same in Iceland in Iceland
they are they just did a they announced
a cooperation project with um uh you
know with Antropics where they're
basically going to stuff it in to all
the schools and all that kind of thing
and I think it should be perfect for
Norway. high highly digitalized country
and where people think it's pretty nice
to have a lot of spare time and of
course AI helps you with that
and it's a once you know you you read
the book uh about uh Nvidia for instance
and Yensson Huang talks about this once
in a lifetime opportunity and this is
just a once in a-lifetime opportunity
for people companies and countries to
pull apart
>> and if you don't do that you're sort of
going to be left behind if people
There's uh two I mean Alpha School I
guess is one of them who's who's using
AI to get curriculum down to two hours a
day. The students are getting massively
better outcomes and then synthesis is
tutor has created this math program
through I think it's uh kindergarten
through grade eight or nine now and the
results are like just off the charts.
They move kids two standard deviations
within like 3 or 4 months. And so we've
demonstrated that it's better than
teachers. But the impediment to that
would be what do you think? Like why
wouldn't people do it? What would be the
argument against
>> I don't know why people would do it.
They should do it. I mean they so should
do it.
>> What's the most important data you look
at these days?
>> Uh I don't have like just one or two
data sources. I read uh just a lot of
newspapers and I think what's going on
in the world now is just so incredibly
fascinating and it's so exciting to be
alive, you know, and so I just wake up
at 5 and I just spin out of bed. I just
can't wait to get out of bed uh to start
to read the papers and then I just
start, you know, the Financial Times,
Wall Street Journal, New York Times, all
these things. And wow, the stuff that
goes on now is just in incredible things
that you didn't think was possible uh
you know a year ago that's now
happening, right? Um, so I was up in a
forest um a few weeks ago and um with
seven of my best friends and um and we
were predicting okay what's going to
happen over the next 12 months. So we
and we tape it we tape recorded and then
we were we were playing our predictions
from last year
and you know these are really clever
people and how do you think we did?
>> Terrible. Terrible. Terrible. I mean we
were like 80% wrong. You know, we didn't
we didn't we didn't predict that Trump
would win the election a few weeks
later. We didn't we didn't think about
like tariffs and relationship between
the US, Europe, you know, what's going
on now in the US in Europe, in India, in
China. We had no clue. And so I think
trying to predict in this world is just
more and more, you know, useless.
So what you need to do, you just need to
work on speed and agility.
Go deeper on that for a second. How
important is speed and agility?
>> Well, I [clears throat] have a big thing
with speed, you know, speed is
well, I mean, [laughter]
speed speed is a mindset and it is, you
know, um he struck me again going back
to New York, you know, I buy this every
morning, I buy this uh you know, egg and
uh egg and ham roll and just speed with
which they wrap it. I mean, my so the
speed in New York is very high, but
speed generally I think is is super
important, you know. Um it comes to this
first principle. Things shouldn't take
longer than than they need to take. You
know um
[sighs]
you save time by being fast. So this
sounds a bit um strange but you know if
you answer if I if I send you an email
and you answer within one minute how
long does that email need to be? Two two
words, right? And I'm impressed because
you answer really quickly. If you answer
the next day, how long does it have to
be? what a paragraph and you answer a
week later. It needs to be a page,
right? So you so you just save time by
being quick. [music]
You're in meetings all day. You're
trying to stay present, but you're also
worried you'll forget the decision, the
action item, the important next step.
That's where Granola comes in. Granola
is an AI powered notepad for meetings.
You jot down rough notes like you always
do, and in the background, Granola
transcribes and turns them into clear,
useful notes when the meeting ends.
There are no bots joining your calls, no
distractions, just a clean notepad that
helps you focus. During or after the
call, you can chat with your notes. You
can ask Granola to pull out action
items, help you negotiate, make a
decision, write a follow-up email, and
so much more. I even use it when I'm
listening to podcasts. Once you try it
on a first meeting, it's hard to go
without. Head to granola.ai/shane
and get three months free with the code
shane. That's granola.ai/shane.
Most things worth having in life reward
focus. Dating should, too. The League is
built for people like me who know who
they are and what they want. Instead of
endless options, it delivered me a
curated set of profiles each day, so my
time and attention stay directed towards
what matters. What stood out to me most
is the community. High-quality people
who are intentional and serious about
building something real. If you're ready
to approach dating the same way you
approach the rest of your life with
clarity and purpose, this is worth your
attention. The League. Find someone in
yours. Download the app and apply today.
How do you think about urgency? That's
one thing we didn't that was not a word
we used when we were sort of like
thinking about uh American versus
European mindsets.
>> Yeah, I just think uh you know urgency
is I I try to build urgency into most
things. you know, in my office, I have a
I have this uh this watch, this kind of
clock, and it counts down the number the
days I've got left in in my job. So,
it's not because I look forward to to
stop working because I I love my job,
but I have this thing on the wall. And
so, you come in and say, "Hey, N, we
we're going to work on this and um
[clears throat] do you know, I'll I'll
sort it by January." And I said,
"January,
look here. I've got 1,765 days left. We
need to do it now." And then he said,
"Oh, really? you only have 1,765 days
left. Yeah, let's do it now. Let's do it
now. So, you just you build urgency into
these tasks. I love it.
>> I like that. That's a really good idea.
>> When I was talking with Charlie Mer
about predicting, and he basically said,
"It's a fool's errand. It's better to
position and have agility, but you kind
of have to mix that with a stubbornness,
too."
>> Yeah.
>> How do you think about that?
Um so I think the most important thing
to have in investing is you need to be
stubborn but you need to have the
ability to change your mind. Very few
people have that. Um [clears throat]
somebody like Stan Rick and Miller has
it
but the combination is rare.
You need to be stubborn in order to do
the opposite of everybody else.
Um and when you are when you do these
kind of contrarian investing investments
uh there will be periods where
everything goes against you and it's
stressful but you need to hang in there.
>> Do you think you can teach people to
change their minds?
>> Um I think you can to a certain extent
you can teach them. It's um easier as
you get older I think because you've
seen more cycles.
But it's difficult to find people who
are really contrarian now because it's
you need to you need to live in a in a
space where you are where people don't
agree with you and we you know in in
today's world everybody wants to be
liked and you know have 100 like you
know likes on Facebook or whatever and
so to be to be different from other
people is is tough. So now when I have
when I give presentations at
universities, I I ask people, hey,
anybody here who thinks differently from
other people who kind of think that they
are weird, that they that nobody
understands them, hands up. So typically
less than 10%. I said, you guys, you're
great. We'd love to hire you. Can
everybody else put a hands up? And then
the other 90% is like, you know, sorry
guys, you're just like everybody else.
You're never going to make much money,
but there is hope. you can change, you
know, and I I kind of think people
hopefully they go out of that room and
think, you know what, I want to be
different, you know. It's something we
should really treasure and and love. I,
you know, wear it is good, right? Go
deeper on that for a second in terms of
I think a lot of people optimize their
lives not necessarily to be liked, but
definitely not be, you know, hated or
disliked by people
>> and that causes all these weird societal
distortions.
>> Yeah. you you don't have to be disliked
even though you dis you you know people
disagree with you but you know in my in
my mind life is not a popularity contest
so my wife says that well only people
without friends say that but I don't I
don't think so I think you
life is for sure not the popularity
contest
and
>> you're definitely not popular all the
time you have that big number on the
screen
>> you can't you know you can't be popular
all the time and you have to
you know you have to be used to the fact
that whatever even if you're by 10% will
disagree with you.
>> Do you read the comments that are
negative about you?
>> No.
>> Do you read?
>> But I also I also don't read the
positives.
>> Okay.
>> And I don't believe them. You know, I
don't believe the positives. I don't
believe the negatives.
>> So when you read the newspapers, like
how do you read them? Are you reading
headlines and then if it catches you,
you read the article or is there a
different way that you skim or process
that? I read I go through headlines and
then I drill down if it's either
something I am interested in or
something I know I should know more
about
uh or if I'm going to meet somebody
who's interested in that particular
field or I know somebody who's
interested then I pass it on to somebody
else or if I've met the person uh or had
him on our podcasts.
>> How do you test your assumptions before
making a big investment? [snorts]
So that's where we that's where I think
we can be better and I think we can
develop this and I think the by using
more of a scientific method
um I think we can be better and I do
think that there is I I think there is
something called I think there is an
objective truth. I think there is
something which is correct and we need
to we need to find it and um so I have
much more of an open mind now than I had
in the past. I I think I listen to more
different types of input and opinions
and I try not to jump to conclusion.
[clears throat]
>> Has that made you a better or worse
investor based on returns?
>> Well, so so I I don't run money myself
now. I'm you know running a a company
where we have a lot of people running
money. But for sure it's going to make
you a better investor if you take more
uh of the different opinions into into
the equation. If you are long something,
you listen to the shorts you and vice
versa. I mean, there really is a truth,
you know. Don't you think?
>> Do you think there is an objective
truth?
>> I would like to think so. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I think that that's But how do we
get at that truth is the
>> listening to different types of people.
>> Yeah. But then you're you're making a
judgment call at some point on what
>> what's closer to the truth and what's
not.
>> Of course. And then you have to kind of
uh well then you link in analysis and
you know some pattern recognition and
and so on and hopefully you get to
something which is correct.
>> I think the the source of most of our
poor decisions is just blind spots.
There's information we're missing.
There's something we don't see. There's
something and our job is to
>> um
>> reduce our blind spots. I don't know if
we can completely eliminate them but we
can definitely reduce it.
>> Yep. And then we reduce it through
talking to people and getting different
perspectives. And it's just like if you
and I were standing beside each other
right here and you took a photo and I
took a photo. Both of those photos are
100% accurate.
>> But if we add them together, we get more
of a picture than we do individually
because it'll be slightly different
because we're standing at slightly
different angles with different offsets.
>> Y
>> How is your attitude towards risk
changed?
>> It's um
it it's a difficult one. I amum probably
in some
ways become more risk averse. On the
other hand, there are some risks I
probably take more of now than I did in
the past. Right? So the risk people's
risk appetite uh depends on many things.
Um I mean everything else being equal,
men take more risk than women, which is
why we crash our cars much more, right?
Um
young take more than older people.
Extroverts take more than introverts.
It's geographically based, right?
American people take more risks than
let's say Asian people.
Um, and [clears throat and laughter] I'm
sorry, I'm not I'm not the one who has
invented this, okay? Because I I did a
degree in social psychology and one of
my papers was on exactly this is just
how is risk appetite linked to the big
five, you know? And uh so as you get
older on average you take a bit less
risk but as you also as you build wealth
you take a bit more risk sometimes.
Um so I don't I'm sorry this was a long
answer. I'm not sure I have a very clear
answer here. So risk is interesting
right? So then you talk to some people.
So in so let's say you do private equity
and you interview somebody like Steve
Schwarzman which we [clears throat] did
on our podcast right? So like okay it's
really important not to lose money. So
you need to really look at the downside.
Now in venture capital, it doesn't
matter whether you lose money on a lot
of stuff as long as you capture the
really big winners, right? So you can lo
you can lose nine out of 10 as long as
you get the one, right, which is just
like going up like a rocket.
The the issue here is that the rocket
the the entry ticket for the rocket
which was $1 million in the past, that's
not like $500 million.
>> Yeah.
>> So that rocket better go up, right?
And you guys do mostly it's like index
plus.
>> Yeah, we are we are we are very index
there. We got a very uh we got a really
great investment mandate from the
minister of finance. It tells us how
we're going to be how roughly how we are
going to be positioned. It gives us a
risk budget and then we are pretty close
to that and that's that's important for
many things but it's also important
because it limits how much money we can
lose. So how does that work in practice?
you you basically like start with 100%
in the index and then you're like okay
well we're going to take a little less
of this and a little more of that or
>> yeah pretty much right so we would have
I would say we have 20% of the active
20% of the capital we would run in a
very active way and the other one the
other part of the capital will do
smaller tweaks
>> but you you have a lot of money coming
in every year I would imagine it's
probably on the order of a 100
billionish if not more
>> well it's um it depends on energy prices
but uh generally there's been inflows
And so do you take that and you no
matter what the price is like say today
where you have uh you know the top seven
stocks account for 46% of the US index
do you just how do you allocate that new
money coming in do you just sort of like
pop it into the index or
>> kind of we get we get uh the the the
inflows or outflows are they're monthly
right so you get the money uh on a
particular day and then you have to
think when do you deploy it into the
market you do it a did bit beforehand or
a bit afterwards or you know bit before
and after and we use AI to optimize
those type of decisions.
>> Do you try to frontr run index changes?
>> Yeah.
>> Using AI I would imagine.
>> What's gotten harder in investing?
>> Everything.
>> Nothing's gotten easier. No,
>> everything's gotten harder.
>> No, I mean everything has gone harder. I
would say what's getting getting easier
is research, right?
uh because of the deep research
functions in [clears throat] some of the
models you get incredible incredible
amount of knowledge within within 5
seconds. It would take you ages to do
that before and it's well structured and
it's um and you can play around with it
and so that's I mean that's just
phenomenal. It's just phenomenal.
How do you think about the rise of
passive investing when it comes to
retail? What are the pros and cons of
that? Well, the pros is that it's
cheaper, so people don't pay that much
fees.
It's difficult to beat the market. Um,
the natives is that you will, I mean,
they would typically perpetuate uh
bubbles because with more passive money,
they go into, you know, stocks which
have done historically well and they
perpetuate uh the moves.
Is your goal active return like a active
um or total return absolute return or is
it sort of relative to the index?
>> Relative relative to the ind.
>> So we are measured against a reference
index which is uh constructed by the
ministry and then we try to beat that.
Historically over the last close to 30
years we've had 25 basis points of
performance. So you would say hey that's
not so much. Well, the thing is that if
if you have a lot of money,
>> it's these are pretty they it ends up
being pretty big uh you know absolute uh
amounts.
>> And when you were running your own fund
before that, what was the the worst sort
of investing mistake that you made and
what happened?
The worst mistake was during the
financial crisis. We were in a subprime
lender and it turned out that there was
accounting fraud and um it was a big
position and that's that's the worst
that's the worst investment I've ever
made. Uh and what I learned was that um
you don't want to go into dubious
business models. And so Brian, you can
say, you know, it's not really
um certainly the type of company we're
invested, I I would say it's not really
I mean, is it ethical to
lend money to people who are in a tough
situation in life? Well, I don't know.
It certainly was a really bad
investment. I wouldn't invest in that
type of company. Now,
>> what would you like? What was the lesson
you took away from that? Is it the
business model? Is it the
>> it's just a business model and it's just
I I just don't want to I just don't
think you should profit from people who
have a tough time.
>> What would be the counterargument to
that if you were to argue with yourself?
I mean
>> I don't think there's a I don't think
there's a good counter argument.
>> The push back would Wouldn't it be like
maybe I'll play devil's advocate here
for a second, but wouldn't it be that
people uh all need credit? We've all
been down on our luck and maybe we don't
have the best credit rating and
>> but it's just how you do it and how you
go about it and what you charge for it.
>> Yeah.
>> It shouldn't be sort of user rates for
sure.
>> No.
>> Um did you do a postmortem after that?
>> Totally.
>> And then how do you have the confidence
to sort of come back and take big swings
after you lo like you lost a lot of
money on that one.
>> Because you as long as you don't do the
same mistake. I mean, why why why make
the same mistakes when there are so many
mistakes to take from, you know, you
find some new ones. [laughter]
>> That's originality and mistakes. I love
it.
>> Um, but you know, Okay. So, so the risk
taking is really interesting. So, most
people take less risk when they lose
money.
>> Mhm.
>> Even though you should take the same
amount of risk. So, here we use a sports
psychologist. I I sail and I did a lot
of competition when I was a bit younger.
And I sailed with some of the British
Olympic sailors and they were just
really really good, right? And so I
asked [clears throat] them, hey, why are
you so good? Well, you know, we we have
two reasons. One, we have a very uh
great we got a really good debrief
system and also we work with sports
psychologist, you know, to work with
mental type of uh you know, strength.
And so what is important in sailing is
that you know you can be number one and
then the wind the wind direction changes
and then suddenly you're you're the last
one. Now next race you need to take the
same type of risks you know you cannot
let it impact you and that's the same
way it is with investing you know just
because you lost you need to get back on
your horse and take the same amount of
risk and it's very difficult and that's
why you need some psychologist to help
you with this
um you know I did a podcast with Magnus
Carlson the chess player and so I asked
him hey what happens when you when you
lost you know a game do you take more
less or he takes more risk in the next
game which I think is interesting but
normally people take less That's
fascinating because I was thinking as
you were saying that a little bit that
the worst people would take less or more
risk because isn't that the I just
picture this guy at the or girl I guess
or whatever at the gambling table in
Vegas and they lose and they keep go you
know double down double down double
down.
>> Investors don't do that.
>> Yeah. Why did you take this job? Like
what did you see?
>> Why did you why did you want it?
>> Oh my it was my it was my it was my
dream job. Right. So I had um
I had run uh this investing company
investment company called AKO Capital
set it up and um it kind of turned 15
years and and I thought it was time to
pass it on to the next generation and do
something else. So I wanted to go back
to university and do another degree and
uh learn some more more things. And then
I had just before that taken a degree in
done a degree in in social psychology
and uh organizational development. And
so when this job came up it was just
like wow you know it combines
uh you know asset management and asset
management is the most interesting thing
you can do in life because it's about
everything that moves everything you eat
where drive all that kind of thing. It's
about psychology. It's about markets.
It's about greed and fair. It's about
macroeconomy geopolitics defense. Uh it
it's about everything, right? So So it
is it is the most incredible game you
could ever construct.
Then I could combine it with
organization development and really see
whether we could take this organization,
you know, to a place that it hadn't been
before and then do something great for
the country. So all my interests came
together in one job. You know, people
talk a lot about product market fit,
sales [music] tactics, or pricing
strategy. But the truth is, success in
selling often comes down to something
much [music] simpler, the system behind
the sale. That's why I use and love
Shopay, because nobody does selling
better than Shopify. They've built the
number one checkout on the planet. And
with Shopay, businesses see up to
[music] 50% higher conversions. That's
not a rounding error. That's a gamecher.
Attention is scarce. Shopify helps you
capture it. and convert it. [music] If
you're building a serious business, your
commerce platform needs to meet your
customers wherever they are on your
site, in store, in their feed, or right
inside their inbox. The less they think,
the more they buy. Businesses that sell
more, sell on Shopify. If you're serious
about selling, the tech behind the
scenes matters as much as the product.
Upgrade your business and get the same
checkout that I use. Sign up for your $1
per month trial period at
shopify.com/nowledge
project. All lowercase. Go to
project to upgrade your selling today.
Shopify.com/nowledge
project.
>> I'm a huge proponent in sovereign wealth
funds. How would you advise the United
States or Canada to set one up knowing
what you know now?
I I I I
think I'm too too humble to advise
anybody uh in that field. What has
worked well for Norway is to have a
sovereign wealth fund which is has broad
political anchoring. So the political
parties generally agree on the on the on
the big decisions which means that when
you have a change of government you do
not change the way you run the fund.
That's important. Then transparency, we
are the most transparent fund in the
world and there is actually a world
championship in that and we won it three
times in a row. Um it's a world
championship which has been run by
actually a Canadian company called SEM
in Toronto. Uh and then the last thing
is you have a we have a spending rule
which means that um the politicians
spend 3% of the fund every year a
maximum of 3%. So I think the you know
the broad political anchoring the
transparency and the spending rule those
those are three really important
factors.
>> Are there any acute sort of um political
factors that go into this? I imagine it
would become political. You're like 20
or 30% of the budget at this point.
>> Yeah. The fund is 25% of the state
budget. Well the whole idea is that the
fund should not be political. And then
how do how does Norway's politics work
its way into how you might vote for your
shares on things like ESG or uh
>> yeah well so that's so that is not
politically decided that's decided
how is that
>> decided
>> well that is decided we got a group of
people who sit and look at votes right
and uh they are very very experienced
people so for instance we look at pay
packages are they structured in a way
which coincide with with the they um you
know I mean are they aligned with our
interests?
Are they long-term enough? Are they
equity based enough? Those kind of
things.
>> Did those decisions come up to you or
are you at least aware of the big ones?
>> I am aware of the big ones but I
deliberately do not uh make decisions
here.
>> What was the thinking behind voting
against Elon's pay package? Like what
was the rationale? Um well the team
thought it was too too big
and uh didn't have the right alignment
with shareholders.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you think
>> and and the fact that it was dilutive
and
you know we own we own shares in 9,000
companies. If if all the CEOs were going
to have a billion dollars that would be
pretty expensive for us.
I like to think of it as you basically
have a almost a 2% toll on the world
economy at this point or something
similar. Is that a fair way to think
about it?
>> I think so.
>> I think that's a I think that's really
cool personally.
>> How do you build long-term thinking into
the organization?
>> It's very [snorts] difficult
[clears throat] because because people
want to do things. Okay. You know, I
think wealth wealth is basically created
by owning one or two really good assets
and then you just hold on to it for the
very long term. That's when you when you
know you look at the wealth
the really big pockets of wealth. That's
basically how it has been created. So
you make money by doing as little as
possible in terms of ownership and
change of ownership stakes. But imagine
now you're a portfolio manager. You come
home from work on Monday and your
[clears throat] husband asks you, "Hey,
how how was it today? What did you do?"
I did nothing. Okay. And next day,
Tuesday, it's like, "Hi, darling. Um,
you know, what did you do today?"
Nothing. And the same thing on
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and it's
just like at the end of the week, hey,
did you did you do anything? No, I
didn't do a thing. It's um it's not
intuitive that that's easy, right? So,
very often the most difficult thing is
not to do anything. And so, one way to
look at it is what I call the inert
inertia analysis. It mean you take you
take the portfolio from January Jan one
and you and you see what would have been
the investment result if I just stuck to
that and not made a single change and
then you look at your actual results for
the year and so often you actually have
detracted from your performance by the
things you've done.
>> That is so true. What does it mean to
think long term? Like if you were to are
there elements to that thinking that go
into it? Um well, you have to figure out
what's your time horizon, right?
Ideally, we should be thinking
with a wealth fund, we should think 50
years ahead. But that's tough because
you haven't got a clue what the world is
going to look like in 50 years time. We
don't even know what it's going to look
like in I would say three years time is
probably the max you can you can look
into the future.
So, it's very tough to be it's very
tough to be long-term in what you do.
I know um Draen Miller is widely known
to take a position then do research
after.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh do you do that as well or?
>> Well, I did I did that uh quite a lot
and I think it's why do you want to do
that? Well, um first of all you if your
gut feel is good and you know people
don't believe in gut feed. If you call
it gut feel if you call it pattern
recognition more people believe in it.
But if your if your pattern recognition
is good and you see something that looks
really interesting, the probability of
that being a good investment is pretty
high. Okay, it's like way over 50%.
Um, and by taking a position, you create
some urgency in the research process
and it's also easier to add to add to
the position, you know, if it goes up
because you already have you already
have some shares, right? So, it's just
like mentally a bit easier to get going.
So, I I was in his camp.
Do you think you can teach intuition or
pattern recognition if you will?
>> No, you can't. But you can but you gain
it with time. So I did uh I did a
research process when I studied social
psychology. I interviewed the 20 best
asset managers in Europe and I asked
them you know about pattern recognition
you know when do you when do you use it
when don't you use it? Well first of all
you call it gutfield nobody believes in
it. You call it pattern recognition a
lot of people believe in it. You don't
believe in anybody else's gut feel only
your own. You can't apply it when you're
young because nobody believes in it. You
can't go to your boss and it's like hey
you know what I think we should I think
we should just you know buy you know 100
million worth of Apple. It's like okay
well why it's just a gut feel I have. It
doesn't it doesn't work right? Nobody's
going to listen to you. So you need to
be pretty senior and ideally you want to
be the boss because if you're the boss
uh you can actually do it and it gets
better over time. So the best the best
people use a combination of the two.
They use a combination of pattern
recognition and analysis depending on
the situation. If you are if you press
for time you you are you're more likely
to use pattern recognition and if it's a
really complex situation where where
it's difficult to put numbers on the
outcome their pattern recognition is
more important. I think I remember an
interview with Magnus where he said
something like that whereas I have an
intuition like an intuitive recognition
of what move I'm going to make
>> and then the person the followup was why
does it take you like five minutes to
move sometimes and he's like well I'm
double-checking.
>> Yeah,
>> I'm slowing down. So what he does uh
well according to what he told me is
that he his uh his gut feel gives him
like three move three different types of
moves and then he analyze them and then
he spends like five 10 minutes but
beyond that uh time he doesn't need time
more than that because it doesn't add to
to the outcome and we we over anal there
are a lot of things we overanalyze
by overanalyzing you it doesn't often it
doesn't improve the outcome but it makes
you more confident about the outcome
which is also not always a good thing.
How do you re like how do you think
about chess which is sort of like a
defined board defined rules uh finite
it's knowable everything's knowable all
the information is knowable it's all
visible versus something like poker when
it comes to intuition
because you if you listen to conman I
mean his argument was to really develop
intuition you need a constant
environment rapid feedback and a lot of
iterations
and in investing You definitely don't
have a constant environment. Feedback
can sometimes take a long time and you
might not get a lot of iterations at the
table.
>> Well, I would argue you get feedback all
the time in investing.
>> How is that
>> because you well because you just the
share price tells you something, right?
>> But the share price tomorrow like if you
buy today, the share price tomorrow is
that feedback or is that sort of noise?
How do you think about that?
>> Well, it depends. It depends. It can be
can be either.
>> So, how do you know when you're wrong?
Well, generally speaking, uh, you know,
with the share prices going against you,
that's an indication of the fact that
you may be wrong. But of course, you
don't know for sure.
>> How do you seek out disagreement?
>> Well, first you have to create an
environment where people
are okay to disagree with you. You need
to listen. Um,
you need to take what they say into
consideration.
Uh, so you need to create that kind of
atmosphere.
In the beginning in my job, people
didn't disagree with me. They all agreed
and that's not very good. Now they
disagree all the time. You know, it's
really good.
>> How did you change that cuz that so
often leaders leaders insulated?
>> No, by creating that hopefully security
for people to be able to speak up. I
mean, is everybody telling me all the
things they mean all the time? No, of
course they don't because some people
have, you know, respect for the CEO and
that kind of stuff. But we are creating
ways of doing it. For in I mean you're
Canadian, right? So you are you I'm sure
you are, you know, into isoki. No,
[clears throat] you have these pucks is,
you know, things that you, you know,
play with. We have them on the table.
It's just like, hey, here is a straight
puck. I disagree with what you say. I
think you're wrong. So then you put the
disagreement into like a physical object
and you take it away from the person. So
it's not personal. It's just like, hey,
you know what? I think what you're
saying here is just crap. And that's
really good. So in the front now we have
like a straight puck award. So the
people who is kind of talking up uh you
know properly disagreeing with me gets a
buck. It's good.
>> I like that idea.
>> I love it. I think it's just really
good.
>> What other ideas do you use internally
that would be along the same lines that
may seem interesting or counterintuitive
that are actually super effective?
>> Well, you just have to work on getting a
feedback culture. You know, we are
working on it. It's not easy. It's not
easy to give feedback and it's not easy
to receive feedback. So, you just have
to do it all the time. I'm getting
better at it at this, you know. I'm I'm
I'm more of a straight talker. I tell
people more now that I disagree with
them and uh and I tried to give them
feedback straight after, but it's not
easy. People are very sensitive, you
know.
>> Is there anything you've learned about
how you disagree with people that makes
a difference?
>> Well, you I mean, you can pack it in a
touch, but I think you just want to be
pretty straight.
>> Yeah. A lot of people are sensitive when
you sort of
>> totally I mean but it's also the age
right I mean young people are very very
sensitive in in the Nordics we are like
hyper sensitive and in the public sector
they are very very sensitive you know.
>> Yeah. And then the the feedback you get
is it's so interesting because a lot of
these conversations actually turn into
that which is like I disagree with you
and then it's well I didn't like the way
you disagreed with me and you made me
feel and then the the whole topic of the
conversation has changed from the actual
thing where [clears throat] it's not
like I disagree with you as a person. I
disagree with your opinion on this
thing, but now all of a sudden we're
talking about how you feel about my
disagreement.
>> Absolutely.
>> And it sort of derails things. It's
crazy. What do you look for when hiring?
Um, curiosity, intelligence, integrity,
drive.
>> How do you test for curiosity? Like,
what does that look like?
>> What are you trying to learn now? What
have you learned lately? What have you
learned lately?
>> Me, I'm learning every day. I've done
deep dive on you for the past Tuesday.
That [laughter]
>> poor thing.
>> I've learned lots. I've learned lots
about you. One of the favorite things
that came up in my learning about you is
you have an ice cream stand outside of
your office or something.
>> That's really good. That's really good.
>> Yeah. Why do you use that? because
[snorts] you want um you want people to
come by and talk to you. And so I got a
sofa next to the ice cream box
[clears throat] and I kind of hang out
on the sofa quite a bit, you know, like
uh just chill there and then um people
come by to have an ice cream and say,
"Hey, what what are you working on just
now?" And they tell me what they're
working on and it's really interesting.
And sometimes he's like, "Yep, but have
you spoken to this guy? I think he or
she is doing the same thing as you. Have
you spoken to that person?" So I just
learn a lot. It's great. I mean the
payback on that ice cream box is
probably I don't know thousand times
payback at least.
>> One of the other things I learned about
you that I found fascinating that I
wanted to follow up on actually is you
had all these conversations after you
started or right before you started.
>> You had hundreds of conversations with
people.
>> I had 140.
>> 140. What were those what was the
structure of those conversations like?
>> Um okay so this is something I learned
from a guy called Albert Benny. He was
the head of a company in Switzerland
called Gabberit and another one called
Lonza. And he said, "Nicoline, when you
because when I got the job, I thought,
you know, gee, I got the job. I mean,
what do you do when you get a new job?
What do you do?" So, I rang all the best
cos I've ever met. I said, "Hey, what do
I do? I I got a new job. I mean, how
should I how do you approach a new job?"
You have a lot of conversations with
people and you do them before you start
because after you started, you have you
won't have any time. and um and you do
it because people need to get to know
you and you need to get to know them and
you need more data points so that you
can make your decisions. So that's very
important. So I sit down with 140 people
and I just start, hey, what's on your
mind?
>> That's it.
Yeah. And then [laughter]
people have stuff on their mind, right?
Yeah. What do people think about? That's
very interesting. But then of course you
you develop it's just like okay what is
what are the what are the good things
here what would you change what's your
advice to me those kind of things and
it's very clear you know when you the
funny thing is that when I had you know
when you've had half of them you've
[snorts] you get the general gest of
what you need to do
>> you've kind of triangulated like the
same thing is coming up over and over
again so that's a strong signal
>> absolutely [clears throat] I do the same
now so I'm in New York for a month I sit
down with everybody in the firm here we
got 100
and uh hey what's on your mind and um
you know there's a pattern emerging and
I if there is a problem I try to I well
I change it. Do you ask people what
you're doing that doesn't make sense?
>> Uh yeah I do but I probably should do
even more because people do generally
speaking we all do things which are
which don't make sense
>> and then inertia sort of like takes
overtally like we're doing
>> totally we make reports which nobody
reads right that kind of thing.
>> Yeah.
>> So so that's the first thing you do when
you when you talk to people. So then you
distill down okay of everything I've
taken from these 140 conversations what
is it what are the three most important
things and then you put together a
leader group and you execute those three
things and you take the time you spend
the time it takes people leaders who
fail they try to do too many things too
quickly and we were in the beginning I
we moved too quickly twice and then we
we got the message and we slowed down.
go deeper on that for a second because
that that strikes me as um something
really interesting where a lot of people
are trying to go faster and faster and
I'm thinking you know specifically uh my
friend Cass had a shirt on yesterday he
did the uh open investor call um and his
shirt literally said faster and he was
all about increasing velocity and he had
just taken over I think uh September
14th or 16th or whatever um but like how
do you how how do you yeah just go
deeper on
First of all, um you need to you need to
[clears throat] execute change as a
combined leader group because if you if
you don't have if you don't if you
aren't a combined leader group and you
try to do something on your own, you'll
trigger uh the immune system of the
organization. You know, the organization
just want to have you out and they often
succeed. You know, you are isolated, you
just don't get things done and so on. So
you need to the organization needs to
feel okay this is a this is a combined
leader group there is no it doesn't make
any sense to try to resist this change
because it's going to come I can just as
well just cave in and accept it right
um and then you need to you need to
prioritize and you need to have not too
many things and you need to
overcommunicate
and um the thing with overcommunication
it's become just becoming clearer and
clearer you know you think you've said
it you think they've heard it they
haven't heard it it's very very tough to
get something to really permeate through
an organization.
So we just
>> But then you think, gee, I've said it 10
times and I nearly I'm I'm so bored of
myself, but then you're only halfway.
Just need to keep going, you know?
>> Same message over and over and over
again.
>> Yeah.
>> And how do you evaluate CEOs from a
competence point of view from the
outside just using public information?
What's your thought process when you're
sort of evaluating whether this person's
effective or ineffective?
I think it's difficult to
see before they have been in the
position.
Most people I see are competent
otherwise they wouldn't have gotten the
job you know they are
>> they are I mean they know their stuff
right they know the company they know
the things but are they good
communicators are they good at executing
it's tough to see from the outside
how long after somebody has taken over
do you start to see it in the finances
like the analytic numbers the
quantitative numbers
>> I think it depends it depends on Uh, it
depends on the business cycle. It
depends on kind of the product cycle of
a company.
But it takes time to turn around a
company.
>> Totally. I guess the
>> I would say to change a culture is a
10-year project.
>> Oh, wow.
>> Yeah.
>> Why do you think it takes so long?
>> Well, I mean this I've been in the job
for 5 years now. I think I'm roughly
half the way in.
>> If you had to do it faster, how would
you do it? Is it a matter of force? Like
if we think of it from physics it's
>> no I think if you do it faster you need
to lay off people then you need to
change the people
>> right
>> and in some in some businesses you can
do that but but I but you know we can't
do that in I mean in Europe it's it's
difficult and also we got great people
you know we were amazing people I think
we got an incredible lineup of you know
very very able you know professionals
and so you know but there just are a few
things that we'd love to you to change,
right? We want to have more feedback
into the system. We want to move a bit
faster. We want to have a bit less fear.
We want to uh do these kind of things.
>> But that was I mean it was uh it
probably it wasn't working as well um
before you as now maybe. Um but it's
sort of like that's working when you
think about
>> Yeah. I mean it was working well. I mean
it was is a great company. It was not
nothing wrong with the company. I mean
really good. I mean, just had a
fantastic performance, right? But I just
thought it needed some tweaks.
>> Yeah.
>> But I mean, technologically, it was
topnotch. Um, compliance-wise,
top-notch, a lot of really, really good
things. It's the envy of the world now.
Well, it's a it's a good company. You've
taken I mean, just in the sense of the
sovereign wealth fund, too, right?
you've taken these these reserves that
you have and you've turned them into
perpetual wealth not only for all your
citizens but global influence and a
tollbridge on the world economy. I mean
I think that's amazing.
>> Well I well I so I would say that's
that's really the um that's to the
credit of the politicians. You know, the
politicians decided when they found oil
and back in ' 69, I mean, they decided
after they found oil, listen, we should
put this into a fund and so in 96 they
set it up. First deposit was, you know,
relatively small and now it's grown a
lot, right? But the [clears throat]
politicians were really foresighted and
uh and they've been good ever since to
be true to the principles.
What are you trying to learn right now?
>> Lots of things. I
[laughter]
I I just feel I know so little and you
know I'm just looking at the podcasts
I'm doing over the next few months and
I'm learning about all these kind of
things and I needed to learn them anyway
but but that kind of makes it urgent. I
really need you know by next week I need
to know more about uh networks.
Um,
I need to read up on crypto. I need to
uh read up on IMF.
I need to
uh [laughter]
Oh my, there is just so much I need to
learn.
>> You guys incredible.
>> You guys don't invest in
>> No, we don't. But I'm talking to
somebody who's in that space
>> in crypto at all.
>> Yeah. And I I just don't understand. I
don't understand it. So, I need to to
learn. Is it that you don't invest in
the coins themselves or you sort of like
a Bitcoin or you don't invest in the
exchanges like Coinbase or something?
>> Well, we have we have some we have some
ownership stakes in in some of the
infrastructure
>> because it's in the index and we are you
know so we would own it in a in a bit
more of a passive way. How much do you
work?
I work uh I work all the time,
>> but it's not work. It's
>> it's like Jensen. Is it like Jensen? You
wake up at 5:00 and you're like go go go
go until 9:00 and then you know for him
it it doesn't feel like work. It's just
>> wait to say I mean uh that's what he
that's what he told me and I kind of I I
mean he works more than he works a lot
more than me because he works every
holiday and every Saturday and every
Sunday and all the time. You know, I I
tend to wake up at 5 and then I read
papers and try to understand what's
going on in the world and then I
start to shoot mails and uh you know I
have a notepad at the side of my bed
because if I wake up in the middle of
the night I typically have some ideas
and if you don't get them done a piece
of paper you're going to forget them,
right? So I do that and then I work for
meetings
um and I read in the evenings and
uh you know check out the papers for the
next day and
but but it's not work.
>> Yeah.
>> You know it's just like it's life. So
many people Michael Oitz gave me this
phrase but it's like so many people
fight their job. Um, and so that it's
more of like a transaction than an
integration between work and life. And
>> strikes me that having the view that you
have towards work is much healthier. And
>> yeah, but not all people I mean, hey,
it's not like everybody have the
opportunity to work with what they love
and you know, not everybody is that
fortunate, but I've been really
fortunate in that I've ended up with the
things I I just cannot think of anything
more interesting in in the world.
>> Who do you go to for advice?
>> I go to lots of people. I um
I speak with as many people as I can.
The funny thing when you ask people for
advice, what do what do what do they
think about you afterwards?
>> Do you think they think that you are
more clever or less clever?
>> More
>> more clever. They because you must be
very clever who asked me for advice, you
know. He must he must be really clever.
He understands how clever I am and
therefore he wants to have my opinion.
>> What surprised you the most this year?
everything that goes on in
geopolitically,
>> you didn't see it coming or it just
continues to like push the limits of
what you thought was possible.
>> Yeah.
>> But that's makes [snorts] life
interesting to live. You know, you can
be you can do one or two if you don't
like what's going on. You can be really
depressed about it or you can put on
your student hat and just think, "Oh my,
I can't believe I'm alive to see these
things." You know, it's so interesting.
And I think it is like super
interesting. and technology you know so
the thing is that everything is coming
together at the same time you know the
technology development now is just like
totally totally phenomenal right
>> what a time to be alive I wake up every
day yeah
>> and I remember it wasn't it was only a
couple weeks ago where um AI actually
made the first sort of um bio advance
that humans hadn't made was on cancer
research and they tested the hypothesis
and it was true and I was like this is
like Neil Armstrong stepping on the moon
like This is this is incredible. This is
the first stage of the first real thing.
I thought that was amazing. I was so
excited about that.
>> We always end with the same question
which is what is success for you?
>> Success is to make a an impact in other
people's life in a positive manner.
>> It's a great answer. Thank you for
taking the time today. I really
appreciate it.
>> Thank you.